#  Server-Sent Events
## INTRODUCTION

I wouldn't be surprised if you've stumbled on this article wondering, "What the heck are [Server-Sent Events](http://dev.w3.org/html5/eventsource/) (SSEs)?" Many people have never heard of them, and rightfully so. Over the years, the specification has seen significant changes, and the API has taken somewhat of a backseat to newer, sexier communication protocols such as the [WebSocket API](http://www.html5rocks.com/tutorials/#websockets). The idea behind SSEs may be familiar: a web app "subscribes" to a stream of updates generated by a server and, whenever a new event occurs, a notification is sent to the client. But to really understand Server-Sent Events, we need to understand the limitations of its AJAX predecessors, which includes:

**Polling** is a traditional technique used by the vast majority of AJAX applications. The basic idea is that the application repeatedly polls a server for data. If you're familiar with the HTTP protocol, you know that fetching data revolves around a request/response format. The client makes a request and waits for the server to respond with data. If none is available, an empty response is returned. So what's the big deal with polling? Extra polling creates greater HTTP overhead.

**Long polling (Hanging GET / COMET)** is a slight variation on polling. In long polling, if the server does not have data available, the server holds the request open until new data is made available. Hence, this technique is often referred to as a "Hanging GET". When information becomes available, the server responds, closes the connection, and the process is repeated. The effect is that the server is constantly responding with new data as it becomes available. The shortcoming is that the implementation of such a procedure typically involves hacks such as appending script tags to an 'infinite' iframe. We can do better than hacks!

Server-Sent Events on the other hand, have been designed from the ground up to be efficient. When communicating using SSEs, a server can push data to your app whenever it wants, without the need to make an initial request. In other words, updates can be streamed from server to client as they happen. SSEs open a single unidirectional channel between server and client.

The main difference between Server-Sent Events and long-polling is that SSEs are handled directly by the browser and the user simply has to listen for messages.

## SERVER-SENT EVENTS VS. WEBSOCKETS

Why would you choose Server-Sent Events over WebSockets? Good question.

One reason SSEs have been kept in the shadow is because later APIs like [WebSockets](http://www.html5rocks.com/tutorials/#websockets) provide a richer protocol to perform bi-directional, full-duplex communication. Having a two-way channel is more attractive for things like games, messaging apps, and for cases where you need near real-time updates in both directions. However, in some scenarios *data doesn't need to be sent from the client*. You simply need updates from some server action. A few examples would be friends' status updates, stock tickers, news feeds, or other automated data push mechanisms (e.g. updating a client-side Web SQL Database or IndexedDB object store). If you'll need to send data to a server, XMLHttpRequest is always a friend.

SSEs are sent over traditional HTTP. That means they *do not require a special protocol or server implementation* to get working. WebSockets on the other hand, require full-duplex connections and new Web Socket servers to handle the protocol. In addition, Server-Sent Events have a variety of features that WebSockets lack by design such as automatic reconnection, event IDs, and the ability to send arbitrary events.

## JAVASCRIPT API

To subscribe to an event stream, create an EventSource object and pass it the URL of your stream:

	if (!!window.EventSource) {
	  var source = new EventSource('stream.php');
	} else {
	  // Result to xhr polling :(
	}
**Note**: If the URL passed to the EventSource constructor is an absolute URL, its origin (scheme, domain, port) must match that of the calling page.

Next, set up a handler for the message event. You can optionally listen for open and error:

	source.addEventListener('message', function(e) {
	  console.log(e.data);
	}, false);
	
	source.addEventListener('open', function(e) {
	  // Connection was opened.
	}, false);
	
	source.addEventListener('error', function(e) {
	  if (e.readyState == EventSource.CLOSED) {
	    // Connection was closed.
	  }
	}, false);
When updates are pushed from the server, the onmessage handler fires and new data is be available in its e.data property. The magical part is that whenever the connection is closed, the browser will automatically reconnect to the source after ~3 seconds. Your server implementation can even have control over this reconnection timeout. See Controlling the reconnection-timeout in the next section.

That's it. Your client is now ready to process events from stream.php.

## EVENT STREAM FORMAT

Sending an event stream from the source is a matter of constructing a plaintext response, served with a text/event-stream Content-Type, that follows the SSE format. In its basic form, the response should contain a "data:" line, followed by your message, followed by two "\n" characters to end the stream:

	data: My message\n\n
### MULTILINE DATA

If your message is longer, you can break it up by using multiple "data:" lines. Two or more consecutive lines beginning with "data:" will be treated as a single piece of data, meaning only one message event will be fired. Each line should end in a single "\n" (except for the last, which should end with two). The result passed to your message handler is a single string concatenated by newline characters. For example:

	data: first line\n
	data: second line\n\n

will produce "first line\nsecond line" in e.data. One could then use e.data.split('\n').join('') to reconstruct the message sans "\n" characters.

### SEND JSON DATA

Using multiple lines makes it easy to send JSON without breaking syntax:

	data: {\n
	data: "msg": "hello world",\n
	data: "id": 12345\n
	data: }\n\n

and possible client-side code to handle that stream:

	source.addEventListener('message', function(e) {
	  var data = JSON.parse(e.data);
	  console.log(data.id, data.msg);
	}, false);
### ASSOCIATING AN ID WITH AN EVENT

You can send a unique id with an stream event by including a line starting with "id:":

	id: 12345\n
	data: GOOG\n
	data: 556\n\n

Setting an ID lets the browser keep track of the last event fired so that if, the connection to the server is dropped, a special HTTP header (Last-Event-ID) is set with the new request. This lets the browser determine which event is appropriate to fire. The message event contains a e.lastEventId property.

### CONTROLLING THE RECONNECTION-TIMEOUT

The browser attempts to reconnect to the source roughly 3 seconds after each connection is closed. You can change that timeout by including a line beginning with "retry:", followed by the number of milliseconds to wait before trying to reconnect.

The following example attempts a reconnect after 10 seconds:

	retry: 10000\n
	data: hello world\n\n
### SPECIFYING AN EVENT NAME

A single event source can generate different types events by including an event name. If a line beginning with "event:" is present, followed by a unique name for the event, the event is associated with that name. On the client, an event listener can be setup to listen to that particular event.

For example, the following server output sends three types of events, a generic 'message' event, 'userlogon', and 'update' event:

	data: {"msg": "First message"}\n\n
	event: userlogon\n
	data: {"username": "John123"}\n\n
	event: update\n
	data: {"username": "John123", "emotion": "happy"}\n\n
With event listeners setup on the client:

	source.addEventListener('message', function(e) {
	  var data = JSON.parse(e.data);
	  console.log(data.msg);
	}, false);
	
	source.addEventListener('userlogon', function(e) {
	  var data = JSON.parse(e.data);
	  console.log('User login:' + data.username);
	}, false);
	
	source.addEventListener('update', function(e) {
	  var data = JSON.parse(e.data);
	  console.log(data.username + ' is now ' + data.emotion);
	}, false);
## SERVER EXAMPLES

A simple server implementation in PHP:

	<?php
	header('Content-Type: text/event-stream');
	header('Cache-Control: no-cache'); // recommended to prevent caching of event data.
	
	/**
	 * Constructs the SSE data format and flushes that data to the client.
	 *
	 * @param string $id Timestamp/id of this connection.
	 * @param string $msg Line of text that should be transmitted.
	 */
	function sendMsg($id, $msg) {
	  echo "id: $id" . PHP_EOL;
	  echo "data: $msg" . PHP_EOL;
	  echo PHP_EOL;
	  ob_flush();
	  flush();
	}
	
	$serverTime = time();
	
	sendMsg($serverTime, 'server time: ' . date("h:i:s", time()));

Download the code

Here's a similiar implementation using Node JS:

	var http = require('http');
	var sys = require('sys');
	var fs = require('fs');
	
	http.createServer(function(req, res) {
	  //debugHeaders(req);
	
	  if (req.headers.accept && req.headers.accept == 'text/event-stream') {
	    if (req.url == '/events') {
	      sendSSE(req, res);
	    } else {
	      res.writeHead(404);
	      res.end();
	    }
	  } else {
	    res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
	    res.write(fs.readFileSync(__dirname + '/sse-node.html'));
	    res.end();
	  }
	}).listen(8000);
	
	function sendSSE(req, res) {
	  res.writeHead(200, {
	    'Content-Type': 'text/event-stream',
	    'Cache-Control': 'no-cache',
	    'Connection': 'keep-alive'
	  });
	
	  var id = (new Date()).toLocaleTimeString();
	
	  // Sends a SSE every 5 seconds on a single connection.
	  setInterval(function() {
	    constructSSE(res, id, (new Date()).toLocaleTimeString());
	  }, 5000);
	
	  constructSSE(res, id, (new Date()).toLocaleTimeString());
	}
	
	function constructSSE(res, id, data) {
	  res.write('id: ' + id + '\n');
	  res.write("data: " + data + '\n\n');
	}
	
	function debugHeaders(req) {
	  sys.puts('URL: ' + req.url);
	  for (var key in req.headers) {
	    sys.puts(key + ': ' + req.headers[key]);
	  }
	  sys.puts('\n\n');
	}

sse-node.html:

	<!DOCTYPE html>
	<html>
	<head>
	  <meta charset="utf-8" />
	</head>
	<body>
	  <script>
	    var source = new EventSource('/events');
	    source.onmessage = function(e) {
	      document.body.innerHTML += e.data + '<br>';
	    };
	  </script>
	</body>
	</html>
## CANCEL AN EVENT STREAM

Normally, the browser auto-reconnects to the event source when the connection is closed, but that behavior can be canceled from either the client or server.

To cancel a stream from the client, simply call:

	source.close();
To cancel a stream from the server, respond with a non "text/event-stream" Content-Type or return an HTTP status other than 200 OK (e.g. 404 Not Found).

Both methods will prevent the browser from re-establishing the connection.

## A WORD ON SECURITY

From the WHATWG's section on Cross-document messaging security:

Authors should check the origin attribute to ensure that messages are only accepted from domains that they expect to receive messages from. Otherwise, bugs in the author's message handling code could be exploited by hostile sites.
So, as an extra level of precaution, be sure to verify e.origin in your message handler matches your app's origin:

	source.addEventListener('message', function(e) {
	  if (e.origin != 'http://example.com') {
	    alert('Origin was not http://example.com');
	    return;
	  }
	  ...
	}, false);
Another good idea is to check the integrity of the data you receive:

>Furthermore, even after checking the origin attribute, authors should also check that the data in question is of the expected format....

## DEMO

A [demo app](http://googlecodesamples.com/html5/sse/sse.html) written in PHP is available on googlecodesamples.com along with its [source](http://code.google.com/p/html5rocks/source/browse/www.html5rocks.com/#www.html5rocks.com%2Fcontent%2Ftutorials%2Feventsource%2Fbasics%2Fdemo).

REFERENCES

- [Server-Sent Events specification](http://dev.w3.org/html5/eventsource/)
- [Cross-document messaging security](http://www.whatwg.org/specs/web-apps/current-work/multipage/comms.html#authors)

---
## STARTING WITH WEBSOCKETS
The WebSockets spec has gotten quite a bit of attention for what it enables: a stable, bi-directional [TCP socket](http://www.csc.villanova.edu/~mdamian/Sockets/TcpSockets.htm) between the browser and server. There is no data format imposed on the TCP socket; the developer is free to define a messaging protocol. In practice, passing JSON objects around as strings is most convenient. The client-side JavaScript code to listen for live updates is clean and simple:

	var liveSocket = new WebSocket("ws://streamcongress.com:8080/live");
	liveSocket.onmessage = function(payload) {
	  addToStream(JSON.parse(payload.data).reverse());
	};
While browser support for WebSockets is straightforward, server-side support is still in the formative stage. Socket.IO on Node.js provides one of the most mature and robust server-side solutions. An event-driven server like Node.js is the right fit for WebSockets. For alternative implementations, Python developers can use Twisted and Tornado, while Ruby developers have [EventMachine](http://rubyeventmachine.com/).

## INTRODUCING CRAMP

[Cramp](https://github.com/lifo/cramp) is an asynchronous Ruby web framework that runs on top of EventMachine. It’s written by Pratik Naik, a member of the Ruby on Rails core team. Providing a simple domain specific language (DSL) for real-time web apps, Cramp is an ideal choice for Ruby web developers. Those familiar with writing controllers in Ruby on Rails will recognize Cramp's style:

	require "rubygems"
	require "bundler"
	Bundler.require
	require 'cramp'
	require 'http_router'
	require 'active_support/json'
	require 'thin'
	
	Cramp::Websocket.backend = :thin
	
	class LiveSocket < Cramp::Websocket
	   periodic_timer :check_activities, :every => 15
	
	   def check_activities
	     @latest_activity ||= nil
	     new_activities = find_activities_since(@latest_activity)
	     @latest_activity = new_activities.first unless new_activities.empty?
	     render new_activities.to_json
	   end
	 end
	
	routes = HttpRouter.new do
	  add('/live').to(LiveSocket)
	end
	run routes
Because Cramp sits on top of the non-blocking EventMachine, there are several considerations to keep in mind:

- Non-blocking database drivers must be used, like [MySQLPlus](https://github.com/oldmoe/mysqlplus) and [em-mongo](https://github.com/bcg/em-mongo).
- Event-driven web servers must be used. Support is built in for [Thin](http://code.macournoyer.com/thin/) and [Rainbows](http://rainbows.rubyforge.org/).
- The Cramp app must be run separately from the main Rails app that powers Stream Congress, restarted and monitored independently.

### CURRENT LIMITATIONS

WebSockets suffered a setback on December 8, 2010 when a security vulnerability was publicized. Both [Firefox and Opera](http://hacks.mozilla.org/2010/12/websockets-disabled-in-firefox-4/) removed browser support for WebSockets. While no pure JavaScript polyfill exists, there is a Flash fallback that has been widely adopted. However, relying on Flash is far from ideal. Even though Chrome and Safari continue to support WebSockets, it became clear that to support all modern browsers without relying on Flash, WebSockets would need to be replaced.

## ROLLING BACK TO AJAX POLLING

The decision was made to move away from WebSockets and back to “old-school” AJAX polling. While much less efficient from a disk and network I/O perspective, AJAX polling simplified the technical implementation of Stream Congress. Most significantly, the need for a separate Cramp app was eliminated. The AJAX endpoint was instead provided by the Rails app. The client-side code was modified to support jQuery AJAX polling:

	var fillStream = function(mostRecentActivity) {
	  $.getJSON(requestURL, function(data) {
	    addToStream(data.reverse());
	    setTimeout(function() {fillStream(recentActivities.last());}, 15000);
	  });
	};
AJAX polling, though, is not without its downsides. Relying on the HTTP request/response cycle means that the server sees constant load even when there aren’t any new updates. And of course, AJAX polling doesn’t take advantage of what HTML5 has to offer.

## EVENTSOURCE: THE RIGHT TOOL FOR THE JOB

Up to this point, a key factor was ignored about the nature of Stream Congress: the app only needs to stream updates one way, from server to client — downstream. It didn't need to be real-time, upstream client-to-server communication.

In this sense, WebSockets is overkill for Stream Congress. Server-to-client communication is so common that it’s been given a general term: push. In fact, many existing solutions for WebSockets, from the hosted [PusherApp](http://pusherapp.com/) to the Rails library [Socky](https://github.com/socky), optimize for push and don’t support client-to-server communication at all.

Enter EventSource, also called Server-Sent Events. The specification compares favorably to WebSockets in the context to server to client push:

- A similar, simple JavaScript API on the browser side.
- The open connection is HTTP-based, not dropping to the low level of TCP.
- Automatic reconnection when the the connection is closed.

### GOING BACK TO CRAMP

In recent months, Cramp has added support for EventSource. The code is very similar to the WebSockets implementation:

	class LiveEvents < Cramp::Action
	  self.transport = :sse
	
	  periodic_timer :latest, :every => 15
	
	  def latest
	    @latest_activity ||= nil
	    new_activities = find_activities_since(@latest_activity)
	    @latest_activity = new_activities.first unless new_activities.empty?
	    render new_activities.to_json
	  end
	end
	
	routes = HttpRouter.new do
	  add('/').to(LiveEvents)
	end
	run routes

A significant issue to keep in mind with EventSource is that cross-domain connections are not allowed. This means that the Cramp app must be served from the same streamcongress.com domain as the main Rails app. This can be accomplished with proxying at the web server. Assuming the Cramp app is powered by Thin and running on port 8000, the Apache configuration looks like so:

	LoadModule  proxy_module         /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_proxy.so
	LoadModule  proxy_http_module    /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_proxy_http.so
	LoadModule  proxy_balancer_module    /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_proxy_balancer.so
	
	<VirtualHost *:80>
	  ServerName streamcongress.com
	  DocumentRoot /projects/streamcongress/www/current/public
	  RailsEnv production
	  RackEnv production
	  <Directory /projects/streamcongress/www/current/public>
	    Order allow,deny
	    Allow from all
	    Options -MultiViews
	  </Directory>
	
	  <Proxy balancer://thin>
	    BalancerMember http://localhost:8000
	  </Proxy>
	  ProxyPass /live balancer://thin/
	  ProxyPassReverse /live balancer://thin/
	  ProxyPreserveHost on
	
	</VirtualHost>

This configuration sets an EventSource endpoint at streamcongress.com/live.

### STABLE POLYFILL

One of the most significant advantages of EventSource over WebSockets is that fallback is completely JavaScript-based, with no dependence on Flash. Remy Sharp’s polyfill accomplishes this by implementing long-polling in browsers that don’t support EventSource natively. Thus, EventSource works today on all modern browsers with JavaScript enabled.

## CONCLUSION

HTML5 opens the door to many new and exciting web development possibilities. With WebSockets and EventSource, web developers now have clean, well-defined standards to enable real-time web apps. But not all users run modern browsers. Graceful degradation must be considered when choosing to implement these technologies. And tooling on the server side for WebSockets and EventSource is still in the early stages. It’s important to keep these factors in mind when developing real-time HTML5 apps.